.\"     $$
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 WIDE Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the project nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd Dec 1, 2004
.Dt IST 4
.Os KAME
.Sh NAME
.Nm ist
.Nd ISATAP tunnel interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device ist" Op Ar count
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface supports
.Dq ISATAP
IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation.
It can tunnel IPv6 traffic over IPv4, as specified in
.Li draft-ietf-ngtrans-isatap-08.txt (ISATAP).
.Ss ISATAP
.Nm
interface requires certain configurations to work properly.
according to the ISATAP protocol.
.Bl -bullet
.It
A statically configured valid ISATAP linklocal address:
.Dq A valid ISATAP address
is an address which has the following properties.
If any of the following properties are not satisfied,
.Nm
raises runtime error on packet transmission.
Read the specification for more details.
.Bl -bullet
.It
matches
.Li fe80::0000:5efe:xxyy:zzuu/64
where
.Li xxyy:zzuu
is a hexadecimal notation of an IPv4 address for the node.
.Pp
IPv4 address can be taken from any of interfaces your node has.
.It
Global IPv6 prefix is automatically configured by Router-Advertisement from an ISATAP router.
.El
.It
At least one IPv4 address of ISATAP routers:
It is available in many ways, such as a sepecial domain name
("isatap.domainname"), DHCP option, manual configuration etc.
.El
.Pp
If you would like the node to behave as an ISATAP router,
you have to assign non-linklocal IPv6 addresses to the ISATAP interface
in addition to the above two, and distribute the prefixes by Router-Advertisement as is done with normal physical interfaces.
.Pp
.Nm
can also be configured to be ECN friendly by
.Dv IFF_LINK1 .
See
.Xr gif 4
for details.
.Pp
Please note that ISATAP specification is written as
.Dq accept tunnelled packet from everyone within a site
tunnelling device.
By enabling
.Nm
device, you are making it much easier for malicious parties to inject 
fabricated IPv6 packet to your node.
Also, malicious party can inject an IPv6 packet with fabricated source address 
to make your node generate improper tunnelled packet.
Administrators must take caution when enabling the interface.
To prevent possible attacks,
.Nm
interface filters out the following packets.
Note that the checks are no way complete:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Packets with IPv4 unspecified address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 0.0.0.0/8
.It
Packets with loopback address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 127.0.0.0/8
.It
Packets with IPv4 multicast address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 224.0.0.0/4
.It
Packets with limited broadcast address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 255.0.0.0/8
.It
Packets with subnet broadcast address as outer IPv4 source/destination.
The check is made against subnet broadcast addresses for
all of the directly connected subnets.
.It
Packets that does not pass ingress filtering.
Outer IPv4 source address must meet the IPv4 topology on the routing table.
Ingress filter can be turned off by
.Dv IFF_LINK2
bit.
.It
The same set of rules are applied against the IPv4 address embedded into
inner IPv6 address, if the IPv6 address matches on-line prefixes on 
.Nm
interface.
.It
Packets not from any of the ISATAP routers in terms of IPv4, if the
inner IPv6 source does not match with on-line prefixes on 
.Nm
interface.
.It
Packets with multicast address as inner IPv6 source/destination
.El
.Pp
It is recommended to filter/audit
incoming IPv4 packet with IP protocol number 41, as necessary.
It is also recommended to filter/audit encapsulated IPv6 packets as well.
You may also want to run normal ingress filter against inner IPv6 address
to avoid spoofing.
.Pp
By setting the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag on the
.Nm
interface, it is possible to disable the input path,
making the direct attacks from the outside impossible.
Note, however, there are other security risks exist.
.\"
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss ISATAP
In this example, the ISATAP router's IPv4 address is 133.4.1.1 and 133.4.1.2.
.Pp
Here's the host side configuration. Please take care that you have to send
Router Solicitation periodically by
.Dq rtsold
, since ISATAP routers cannot advertise
unsolicited Router Advertisements.
.Bd -literal
# ifconfig ne0 inet 133.4.5.6 netmask 0xffffff00
# ifconfig ist0 isataprtr 133.4.1.1
# ifconfig ist0 isataprtr 133.4.1.2
# ifconfig ist0 inet6 fe80::5efe:133.4.5.6 prefixlen 64
# rtsold ist0
.Ed
.Pp
Here's the router side configuration.
.Bd -literal
# ifconfig ne0 inet 133.4.1.1 netmask 0xffffff00
# ifconfig ist0 isataprtr 133.4.1.1
# ifconfig ist0 isataprtr 133.4.1.2
# ifconfig ist0 inet6 fe80::5efe:133.4.1.1 prefixlen 64
# ifconfig ist0 inet6 3ffe:ffff:ffff:1::5efe:133.4.1.1 prefixlen 64 alias
# rtadvd ist0
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr inet6 4
.Rs	 
.%A Fred Templin	 
.%A Tim Gleeson	 
.%A Mohit Talwar	 
.%A Dave Thaler	 
.%T "Intra-Site Automatic Tunneling Addressing Protocol (ISATAP)"	 
.%D Dec 2002	 
.%N draft-ietf-ngtrans-isatap-08.txt	 
.Re
.\"
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in WIDE/KAME IPv6 stack.
