.\"     $KAME: stf.4,v 1.3 2000/03/10 13:45:19 itojun Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 WIDE Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the project nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 6, 2000
.Dt STF 4
.Os KAME
.Sh NAME
.Nm stf
.Nd
.Tn 6to4 tunnel interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device stf"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface supports
.Dq 6to4
IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation.
It can tunnel IPv6 traffic over IPv4, as specified in
.Li draft-ietf-ngtrans-6to4-03.txt .
.Pp
Due to the way 6to4 protocol is specified,
.Nm
interface requires certain configuration to work properly.
You must configure single
.Pq no more than 1
valid 6to4 address to the interface.
.Dq A valid 6to4 address
is an address which has the following properties.
If the following properties are not satisfied,
.Nm stf
raises runtime error on packet transmission.
.Bl -bullet
.It
matches
.Li 2001:xxyy:zzuu::/48
where
.Li xxyy:zzuu
is a hexadecimal notation of an IPv4 address for the node.
.It
The interface identifier portion
.Pq lower 64 bits
is properly filled to avoid collision of the address.
.El
.Pp
The prefix length for the interface address address
needs to be 16 in most installations.
Read the specification for more details.
.Pp
.Nm
can be configured to be ECN friendly.
This can be configured by
.Dv IFF_LINK1 .
See
.Xr gif 4
for details.
.Pp
Please note that 6to4 spec is written as
.Dq accept tunnelled packet from everyone
tunnelling device.
By enabling
.Nm
device, you are making it much easier for malicious parties
to inject malicious IPv6 packet to your node.
Administrators must take caution when enabling it.
It is recommended to filter/audit
incoming IPv4 packet with IP protocol number 41, as necessary.
.\"
.Sh EXAMPLES
Note that
.Li 8504:0506
is equal to
.Li 133.4.5.6 ,
written in hexadecimals.
.Bd -literal
# ifconfig ne0 inet 133.4.5.6 netmask 0xffffff00
# ifconfig stf0 inet6 2001:8504:0506:0000:a00:5aff:fe38:6f86 \\
	prefixlen 16 alias
.Ed
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr inet6 4
.Rs
.%A	Brian Carpenter
.%A	Keith Moore
.%T	"Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds without Explicit Tunnels"
.%D	October 1999
.%N	draft-ietf-ngtrans-6to4-03.txt
.%O	work in progress
.Re
.\"
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in WIDE/KAME IPv6 stack.
